# The video podcast
[FP 14 - Interactive Programming](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oDqHNkQK97k)

# Tuesday 4 November 2025
The text is
- Chapter 10 of Programming in Haskell.
- The note The simply typed lambda-calculus in one page (available from Moodle)

# The simply typed lambda-calculus
We will also see a short introduction to the simply typed lambda-calculus; this is the applied lambda-calculus that we saw earlier that is now equipped with a type system without polymorphism.

## Learning goals

For the simply typed lambda calculus
- To understand the syntax of the simply typed lambda calculus 
- To understand and be able to apply the type rules for the simply typed lambda calculus

# Interactive programming
## Learning goals for the session
- To understand the underlying idea of I/O in Haskell
- To be able to use the IO type construct in Haskell
- To be able to use sequencing with do blocks to write interactive programs
- To be able to write Haskell programs that combine the pure and impure features of Haskell

## How you should prepare before we meet on Tuesday
Before we meet, watch the podcast and read the text. You can do this in any order you like. Also see if
you can solve the following two small discussion problems. We will talk about them in class.

1. Write a Haskell program that asks for the name of the user and greets the user with a ”Hello”. We
would like to see the following behaviour:
```
∗Main> hello
What i s your name?
Graham
Hello Graham
∗Main>
```

the solution that I come up with
```Haskell
theGreeter :: IO ()

theGreeter = do putStrLn "What is your name?"
                name <- getLine
                putStr "Hello "
                putStrLn name
```

2. Find out what the following expression does:
`sequence [putStr ”rip”, putStr ”rap”, return()]`

```Haskell
ghci> sequence [putStr "rip", putStr "rap", return()]
riprap[(),(),()]
```

and why Haskell will complain about
`sequence [ putStr ”rip”, putStr ”rap” , getChar ]`
Then give an explanation. (Page 135 is your friend.)

`sequence` is a function that valuates each monadic action in the structure from left to right, and collect the results.
Meanehile the `sequnce_` is behavese the same but does not collect the results.

GHCI complains about the second expression with the following error: 
```Haskell
ghci> sequence [ putStr "rip", putStr "rap" , getChar ]

<interactive>:25:41: error: [GHC-83865]
    • Couldn't match type ‘Char’ with ‘()’
      Expected: IO ()
        Actual: IO Char
    • In the expression: getChar
      In the first argument of ‘sequence’, namely
        ‘[putStr "rip", putStr "rap", getChar]’
      In the expression: sequence [putStr "rip", putStr "rap", getChar]
```
as we can see the problem is with the return type of `getChar` that is different from the one of `putStr` and here the issue is created. The results are collected in a list and elements of a list in haskell cannot have different types.

